Satipathana
Pariyeti
Pattipatti
Pattidhana


Five friends
Sati: awareness faith
Virgo: courage

Accept, don’t ignore, don’t give importance, everything is changing, Impermanence

Five Hinderances
Desire
Aversion
Sloth and torpor
Agitation and remorse
Doubt

Sati = Awareness
Patthana = established

Abidhamma = Higher Dhamma

Matter = Rupa
Mind = Citta

Mind <=====> Matter

Panna: Shrottamaya, chintamaya, bhawanamaya

Sila is base, most important

Middle Path = V.V Important


Nibanna = Beyond Mind  & Matter

Transcend the field of Mind and Matter to get Nibanna where there is no arising and passing away where sense organ doesn’t work.

Path =  Awareness, subtle subtle awareness

Ekayanno Maggo: Only path

Dhamma: Law of Nature example: Fire will burn, h2+O= h2O

Ardent = diligently

4 Types of satipatthana
Kayanupassana
Vedananupassana
Cittanupassana
Dhammanupassana

Noble Eightfold path
RIght understanding
Right thoughts
Right speech
Right action
Right livelihood
Right effort
RIght awareness
Right concentration


Four noble truth
Suffering
Arising of suffering
Cessation of suffering
Path


VV important - For 7 years - 7days
Sila 2. Samadhi and 3. Panna

Always on middle path
Eight fold path
10 Paramis
4 Noble truth

Awareness, discipline, dedications, Motivation, effort, constantly


Vinaya Loke abhijya domanasya => keeping away from craving and aversion

Craving is mother of aversion

Breathe should be only below the nostril and above the upper lip limit less area as possible. Only long breathe when feeling sleep for few times. Awareness of touch, cold and hot, with equanimity & impermanence.

Is desire dukkha?

Why mind is continually making plans for future?

Why desire started to involve in mid of meditation and mind got attracted, how to overcome?

Can we keep our mind focus in breathe for as long as we sit for meditation?

Burning impurities

Atapa = Ardent, hard worker
Sampajano = observing the arising and passing away of vedana (VV Important)
Satima = Awareness

Diligently aware of the arising and passing.
Awareness without sampajano is useless e.g circus girl


Sampajano + Satima

= Samma Sati (The ultimate path of liberation)


Bhanga: everything is dissolved. Annata: No I no my 

Body is not male or femal, its a bunch of sub atomic particle or kalapas.


8 Jahanas is not enough that leads to Nibanna.

Vedana -> Sampajano


Sattipathana

Sub conscious mind is connected to every cells in our body but to its nature is blind, due to its nature, it blindly reacts craving for all pleasant sensations and aversion for all the unpleasant sensation and this works for 24 hours.

Consiouclsy says not to do craving, not to do aversion but sub consciously it does both, day and night.

Solution: Satipatthaqna (4 kind + atapi sampajjano satima)


Sila leads to Samadhi
Samadhi leads to Panna
Panna leads to Liberation




Sum udaya =  Vaya
Ajata = Vahita
—----
Leads to
—-
Mere understanding, Just awareness
Just awareness
—---
Leads to
—-----
Deep rooted sankara
-> need equanimity and sampajano satima
—------
Leads to
—-------
Bhanga (all deep rooted sankara will come out)

Layers of layers sankara will come out, with kind dhamma big, cruel sankaras will come out first and then deep rooted sankaras will come out gradually. But again don’t multiply.

Gotra-bhu (Shrotapannna) who can’t makle sanklaras and can’t go to the lower field of life.

Shrota= Stream of water

Satdagami (Same or 1 more life, 
Anagami : Bhramic stage but will come in mind and matter to reach Nibbanic stage.

Arising -> Passing
Impermanence
This is the time

Vedana : Gross, settled, unsettled sensation

Day 7. English discourse(satipatthana course) Geonka says with Divine eyes can see body parts like open eye in the higher stage.

Body mix with following elements earth=solid, water=liquid, fire=temperature, air=gas.

Looking into every cells or body parts. We say it Annica, Impermanence, Udaya(Rise) and Vya(Fall) and using it mind chatters, sometimes goes beyond the presence but we keep on saying above words as mantras, this could be a road block.

We also has the words “Annica Bodh” where bodh is feeling it.

Sometimes remind “Manually” sometimes mean time on time. Until fully matured with the technique.

Use
“Drasta bhav”, “Sakshi bhav”. In this body, there are hairs of th ehead, hairs of the skin, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sineus, bones, marrow, kidney, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, stomach with its contents, faces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, nasal mucus, synovial fluid and urine.

Equanimous

Impermanence with the nature of the sensations and impermanence with the law of mind & matter phenomena.

How to practice vipassana?
Part by part
Sweep through mass
One breathe to down and another breathe to top.
If any distraction go back to breathe.
Don’t stay in 1 part more than 5 minutes.
Try to move quickly.
Try Piecingly & Penitratingly
Do not pull the pleasant sensation and do not push the unpleasant sensation. If we don’t let it go it will manifest somewhere in different form so equanimity is the solution.
Always be on present (yatha bhuta)
Not a small sensation is small, not a big sensation is big. Any kind of sensation can remove it like “here is the thought", don’t react.
Remember “This is the field of mind and matter”


Vedana -> Sampajano -> Panna -> Vipassana -> Satipatthana -> Liberation

Do nothing, just observe the sensation with impermanence and equanimity.
Any thoughts add mind to the breath while doing vipassana.
Be kind to anything that comes up.
No need to use complex terms to understand and aware the status of mind. Simply use not permanent, no reaction, respect, law of nature. In deep meditation, we forget important complex words but these simple words works.


Types of Jhanas

Buddha says Lokiye Jhana

Mind expanding limitlessly?

After Jhana also there is sankara in the deeply rooted in the mind. (Anusaya cliche)


Vedana in vedana?
Mind in mind?
Directly feeling the feeling, No second object involved.
Sukha vedana
Dukha vedana
Neutral vedana

Anything arising in the mind will spread to the sensations in the body.

Enemies vs Friends

Law of Dhamma(Nature)
Craving : characteristics
Metta
Aversion

Kushala Dhamma (Wholesome)
Akushala Dhamma (Un-wholesome)

Nibanna is like curtain, 5 enemies stays like curtain which are obstacles to see whats happening in the sensations level.

Dhamma: Nature or law or truth of mental content.

Khadhapabbam
5 Aggregates
-> matter tiny little sub atomic particle or Kalapas)
-> Vinyana
-> Vedana
-> Sankara

7 factors of enlightenment
Sati -> Awareness
Dhammanuichiya - Disintegrate or dividing
Viriya -> Effort
Rapture -
Passaddhi - Extreme calm and Peafulness. Full tranquillity
Concentration
Upekkha 



Why sila-samadhi-Panna works on removing sankara from the mind & matter.

Sila: It vibrates the top layer of dirt.

Samadhi: It removes surfacely available directs.

Panna : It has capabilities to remove deeply rooted sankaras and lead to the stage of liberation.
Pass your mind entire body sweep and mass or part by part but with the perfect equanimity with the law of Impermanence: Annica, Annica, Annica.


When you can feel the sensation of entire surface of the body, do piercing and penetrating across all the body parts.

4 Aarya Satya (4 Noble Truth)
Truth of suffering
Truth of the arising of suffering
Truth of the cessation of suffering
Truth of the path

Panajanati : Entire field of vadana
Parinyata : Entire field of vedana
Pariyata : explored entire field of dukha
Parina: Totally irradicated
Domanasya : Unpleasant thoughts
Somasya: Pleasant thoughts
Dukha Vedana: unpleasant body sensation
Sukha vedana: pleasant body sensation

Vinayana: The observer of the vedana until end. When 5 sense organ stops, 1 will remain “The mind”. When the mind stops there is “Nibanna”

Sampajano Narinchite

Last moment of life the sensation in body will take to another loka of our choice to continue the remaining vipassana


Sankara Binyana Pacchaye

Ignorance and sankara is causing us to remain on mind and matter which and is a part of cause and effect.

Chanting from the teacher can stop the bad vibration from interfering which is Sampajano chat, Dhamma vibration can be done on higher vibration.
